>> Richard Feldman: So all of these
exercises are going to have the same exact
format where, basically we have comments,
we have a .c file, and
then we have little comments
that have a little arrow emoji.
And then basically all you have to do for
the exercise is just do
what the comments say.
So I'm going to open
up the first one here.
This is a our first initial
thing here exercise.
So basically, at the very beginning of
each of these exercises, we have, first,
build and run the program.
So make sure you're in the exercises
directory, and then just run this.
So I am, this is my Zed code editor,
if you haven't seen Zed before.
It's awesome.
It's written in Rust,
so it is memory safe.
[LAUGH] So basically,
I'm just gonna cd into exercises.
And now that I'm in exercises,
if we want to just do a little LS,
basically you've got
exercises one through six.
So we have six different sections here,
all of this, 1.c2, .C, etc.
And when you compile them,
which I'm going to do in a second here,
with this command that you can just
copy paste out of the exercise.
It's going to actually generate
a different little binary here,
on your disk.
You can just delete those later
if you want, but his is C.
We compiled the binaries here.
So when I paste this command and
I say gcc-o app1, the -o means output.
So this means output to app1.
If you're on Windows,
well, if you're on Windows,
you should be using Windows Subsystem for
Linux for this course.
But if you were doing Windows programming,
you would actually say
something app1.exe right here.
Then you give it the name of
the source file, which is o1.C, and
then basically because I want
to compile and then run.
I'm telling GCC, which is the well
technically GCC stands for
the Goo C compiler, sorry,
Goo Compiler Collection,
yeah but it's used for C and C++.
It supports both.
And actually on Mac OS, it's funny,
this is actually not using GCC for real.
It's just that GCC is so universal and
so many build scripts rely on it,
that actually Mac OS just
aliases GCC to Clang,
which is the actual
compiler that Mac OS uses.
And the way you can tell this is if you
say GCC dash version, it's, this is Clang,
which is kind of same exact
thing if you say clang-version.
But if you're on Linux or
Windows Subsystem for
Linux, then it's actual real GCC.
So if you do GCC-version,
you're gonna see something different
than what I see on this Mac here.
Anyway, so we're gonna build this and
run it, and hey, it says hello world.
Now I wanna call out your
attention to something that it'll.
It also says, there's this little weirdly
formatted percent thing at the end
here and
this is actually part of the exercise.
So the reason that that's happening is
because we are printing out hello world
without a new line at the end.
And a lot of shells will, if the program
runs and the program does not end in a new
line with its output to standard out,
it prints this special character.
And depending on what Shell you're using
what terminal you're using, you might or
might not see this, or you might
see something slightly different.
But basically, this character is
indicating hey, this program finished, and
they wasn't a new line.
But I'm going to put a new
new line here anyway,
because I don't want to put the prompt
up here, because that'd look weird and
actually, some shells will
just put the prompt up here.
This part will just start right here,
because it's the program
didn't end with a new line.
But it's also quite common for
them to say, hey, just so
you know I'm inserting this new line here.
The program itself did not
actually end in a new line.
So that's one of the things we're gonna
change is we're gonna change this string
to HelloWorld\end.
So we're explicitly going
to add in the new line.
This is one of the things
that Printf will do for you.
So if you do printf, you don't actually
need to put the new line there,
printf will just automatically
add the new line for you.
But write will not, write is, I'm just
gonna give you exactly this string.
I'm gonna send that straight to
standard out, no questions asked.
So we're gonna try changing that,
and of course, when we do that,
we do need to update
the length here to 14.
Because if you keep it at 13, it's only
gonna print out the first 13 characters
and it's Going to skip the new line,
so that won't actually do anything
unless you also change the length.
Then we're going to have some fun.
So the next thing we want to do is
try making the length less than 14.
What happens when you run the program?
You can probably guess it
doesn't print the entire string.
And now try making
the length longer than 14.
You're not going to get a warning,
you're not going to get an error.
You're just going to see what happens.
[LAUGH] Memory safety.
Okay, so try uncommenting the next
two lines as well as the include STDI
at the top.
So this is basically just switching
it over from right to printf and
we're gonna do a little bit of a actually
interpolating a number in here.
And then once you've got that working,
which is just uncommenting that and
then uncommenting up here, then you wanna
try adding a second number named num2.
And pick some other number to do it and
print out both of the numbers.
So when you do that, hint, you will need
to make two changes to printf's arguments.
You won't just need to
change one of the arguments.
And then finally, try having the program
return something other than zero so
you can just sort of see the exit code.
So echo $?,
is what you run in your terminal
to see the output of your program.
So after I do this, and then I do
echo$?at print zero, because that is
the exit code of the last program that
I ran, which was the Hello World thing.
Okay, any questions about the exercises
before we take some time.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: So
new line doesn't count as two characters.
It's only one.
>> Richard Feldman: Yes,
that's a great question.
So \n, yes, is the way that we
specify a new line character,
that's two chracter of source code.
But in terms of semantically what's
actually happening in memory here,
it's just one new line character.
So, yeah, what we're counting is semantic
characters not source code characters,
very good question, okay?
Work through the exercises.
>> Richard Feldman: Great.
All right, so
let's go through the exercises here.
We're gonna start by just doing the basic
build and run the program again.
So just to make sure that
everything's working,
hello world with the percent sign there.
So let's get rid of that little
missing trailing new line there.
So to do that I'm just gonna
delete these comments as I go so
we can remember what we've done.
So change the string to hello
world with a new line, and
then change the length to 14.
Okay, great.
And now we just don't see
the percent sign anymore,
because we actually have a new line there.
Awesome.
And now we're gonna make the length
shorter, so we'll make it just 10, so
that's HelloWorld and
then once again, the percent sign is.
Back, because we're not ending
on a new line once again.
And now for the fun part,
let's make it a lot longer.
Boom, so we got hello world.
And what is that stuff?
What this is, is whatever happens to be in
my binary after that string constant of
Hello world, it's literally just spitting
out whatever memory is in my executable.
That's what kind of memory
safety we're dealing with.
If there happened to be a secret there, an
API key, it would heavily print that out,
no problem.
And if you were writing to a log or
doing an HTTP response or something that,
this could just happily send all of
your API key secrets to the end user.
No problem.
If you just got an integer wrong,
if I bump it all the way up to 2000,
we might see the same thing.
Let's see.
Can I get it long enough that.
Yeah, look, we got something else.
Look, there's something else,
more there in memory.
Now, a lot of these things
are not printing anything.
That might just be because
there's nothing printable there.
A lot of these characters are not
printable in the terminal.
Just kind of silently mess that up.
I don't know if it'll let
me make be this long.
Cool.
Yeah, so now we've got lots of memory.
Look at that.
This is all sorts of stuff
that's in my binary, so, yeah.
This is hello world program, really doing
a good job dumping all the secrets.
We can see,
here's the name of our program.
That's in there for some reason.
BOF, I don't know what that is.
There's are all just random 0s and 1s that
are being interpreted by the terminal as
being text, although, obviously
a lot of these are not text Text.
They're just random 1s and 0s, gibberish,
in some cases, white space, whatnot.
Let's see if we can get the program
to crash from doing this.
It's kinda hard just happily
spitting out all this memory.
As you can see the level of
memory safety we're doing, and
we're going to see plenty more
examples of this as we go.
But there was no compiler warnings here.
There's no errors.
There's no nothing.
But if we did use printf,
at least this particular error,
we would not be susceptible to.
This only happened because I was
intentionally using a number other than 14
to demonstrate what happens if you get
your math a little bit wrong when it
comes to C.
And in the next section, we'll talk about
a little bit more about what's going on
under the hood there
that makes this happen.
Okay, so now let's get into
the more ergonomic world.
So if I just uncomment those two lines,
int num=42, then it's going to be, hey,
wait a minute.
Call the undeclared
library function printf.
What's going on with that?
So, okay, I just need to uncomment that
and now we are actually importing that
because this unisted.h is where Write
comes from and printf comes from stduio.
So now if I print this, it's going to say,
hello world, followed by the number is 42.
And if I want to print out a second
number let's say we do you know
num=2 I don't know 45.
Then I can't just do this because if I do
this, then it's gonna be like okay, well,
didn't change anything.
And I also can't do this,
I can't just stick an extra num2 in there.
It's just going to give me a warning of,
hey, wait a minute,
data argument not used by format string.
This is something about the compiler
actually having some awareness of what
printf is because it's part
of the standard library.
So if I run this,
I will get a little warning here, but
it's going to happily
just do the same thing.
Basically the second argument
is going can be totally ignored.
The second number is %d.
I don't need another newline there,
whoops.
Printf will do that for me.
My bad, printf doesn't do that.
I think you print line from Rust,
my mistake.
So yeah, second number is 45, great, and
basically, if I want, I can change this to
be something else, percent s for a string,
and then it's going to complain wait
a minute, wait a minute,
you said this is an int, but it's not.
However, it'll still
actually let me run it.
It just might crash the program.
This is a really fun error
to get in your C code.
Segmentation fault.
You might notice the absence
of a stack trace.
You don't get one if you If
you do a segmentation fault.
Segmentation fault just basically means
your program tried to read memory
that it doesn't have permission to read
according to the operating system.
So dead, end of program.
[LAUGH] This is all you get.
And debugging these is fun
because this means that you have
some error somewhere and you get no
stack trace whatsoever by default.
There are ways that you can try to wrangle
your way into getting one, but usually
the way that you would deal with something
this is you have to fire up a debugger,
hopefully you can reproduce it.
Sometimes these are highs and
bugs that resist being reproduced.
But yeah,
you definitely don't ideally want to
get segfaults if you can avoid them.
So yeah, fortunately, this is actually
one where the compiler warning would have
actually helped us avoid that and told us,
hey, this is the wrong type here.
But you do notice that,
unlike in some other languages,
this is just considered a warning in C.
In most compilers, this would be a tight
mismatch and it would be, yeah, no,
this is an error.
You're trying to use this thing as
a string that's clearly not a string.
Bad things are gonna happen.
C is, no, if you're sure, go ahead.
You can feel free to run the program,
it might segfault or do whatever.
But yeah, even though it knows
it's not going to block you,
it's just going let you go ahead and
do your thing.
Okay, moving on.
Yeah, so we've had two different
numbers and then finally, yeah,
we can just return something other than 0,
we can return 11.
And now if I echo$?, it says 11.
Any questions about the exercise?
>> Speaker 3: I have one that might be
just pedantic with the language itself.
Is it worth anything to
recast an intuit string?
Can you do that?
Are variables mutable in that way or
is the juice not really worth the squeeze?
>> Richard Feldman: Can you recast a,
okay, so
the terminology here is important.
I wouldn't say, well, okay, so certainly
you can recast an integer to a string.
But what that would mean is,
essentially, let's take this integer and
let's pretend that the 1s and
0s in memory that represent that integer.
We're just gonna reinterpret them and
pretend that they're actually the 1s and
0s of a string.
You can do that, and in fact, we actually
are going to do that in this workshop,
that's what C calls casting.
There's a separate thing you can do,
which is converting,
where you're actually gonna say, okay,
I've got an integer and I want a string.
Basically, you just call a function that
says, turn this integer into a string, and
it will do that for you.
So we could do that, but
honestly, idiomatically,
I would just choose to
use Print off to do that.
Because explicitly going out of your
way to convert that is more work than
necessary if this is just what all
you're going to do with it anyway.
>> Speaker 3: Okay.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: When we include something
at the top of the file importing it.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: In C,
are we just including that entire library-
>> Richard Feldman: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 4: Into our binary-.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah
>> Speaker 4: Or can we pick
just the right function?
>> Richard Feldman: So we're gonna
talk about this more later, but
literally, what pound
include does is copy paste.
So running this line of code is
exactly the same thing as taking
the contents of stdio.h, and
pasting them into your file.
That's what pound include does.
You might be wondering about,
well, hang on a sec.
What if I have,, that thing which
depends on something else, and
then I also depend on that something else?
Is it going to get pasted multiple times?
The answer is yes, but each of these
files that I'm depending on does have
a little bit of logic that uses different
preprocessor macros to basically say.
Don't include myself semantically twice,
even though the text is included twice.
One of the things that the designers of
Go wanted to do better based on their
experiences with C,
which some of them co-created.
Was that they wanted to basically
do a better job with imports and
stuff that to make it more of
a first class semantic thing so
you can make some of
the ergonomics around this better.
This is actually one
of the reasons that C,
especially C++ have worse compile
times than they otherwise would.
Is just,
the semantics of how include work.
I did want to mention, I think,
in the previous question,
I didn't address one implication of
something you're asking, which was.
What happens if there's 100
different functions in std.io, .h,
but I'm only using one of them,
what happens the other ones?
The C compiler actually
doesn't deal with that.
But basically there's a step
after compilation called linking,
which we're not really going to cover
in this course because when I do GCC,
it automatically takes care
of doing that separately.
But basically what linking does is it
deals with after you've compiled your
source code into the binary executable,
there's this extra step.
That works on wiring in certain different
dependencies and doing some other things.
One of the things that can do is it can
do an analysis of the different sections,
you remember we had those labels LC0 and
whatnot.
There's also labels dot,
main for the main function.
And one of the things that can
do is it can go look for, okay,
do we ever actually jump into this
section at all, anywhere ever?
If not just go ahead and delete it, so
it'll just garbage collect those sections
as long as things
are organized into sections.
So typically,
that's how that sort of thing is done.
Is, at the source code level, it is just
copy pasted in the C compiler takes all of
it, spits out a binary that's
bigger than it needs to be.
And then later, the linker will garbage
collect the different sections of
the binary to get rid of
the unused functions.